
Hi All,
 
Here is a condensation of what I learned about twitter from my time in a social network startup. I am certainly no expert, but I was exposed to some "experts" (can you be an expert in tweeting?) and this is how they thought about it:
 
Crash Course in Modern Tweet Theory
 
I think the main insight comes in reframing the question. Instead of "What do I tweet about?" ask instead "Why am I using twitter?"
 
The point of twitter is not to just broadcast ideas/thoughts/pics/stories/whatever, but to engage with other human beings. Along those lines, far more important than what you tweet about is how you interact with other people. I think it is easy to villianize twitter as a whole and forget it is really just a bunch of people out there, and this is just a mode to reach them. Thinking about it this way makes it much more palatable (that is, if you like people).
 
So the question is: who do we want to engage with? First I would assume we want to reach out to other organizations doing similar work as us. So one iteration could look like this:
 
Find another computational biology program somewhere in the world we are interested in, or other related organization, or famous researcher we admire. Something like that.
Find their twitter account and follow them.
Read through their timeline and get a feel for them. See what they are talking about and what they seem to care about.
Pick one tweet about something interesting to you, hit the little "heart" button and follow up on it. If it is a paper, download the paper and skim it (if not fully read it).
Reply to that tweet with a thoughtful response. This is where the engagement begins. You are opening up a conversation with a human being. Twitter itself simply becomes the medium for the kind of human interaction you are probably already fairly well versed in (hopefully)
Hopefully you don't even need to fake it since you are genuinely interested in this person/organization (faking caring is palpably obvious and should always be avoided. Find a reason to care)
At this point maybe you have a conversation going with someone. If it is genuine then they will probably follow you back. Reply to some of their other tweets. Etc.
Repeat.
 
After a few cycles of this, you are starting to build a following. NOW, when you tweet something, it is because you actually want to share it with a bunch of people you are already engaged with. At that point, each tweet becomes a conversation opener with your “followers”. It is an article or idea that you genuinely want to talk about or want feedback on from all of these new amazing people you met that you wouldn't otherwise know since they live all over the place.
 
In other words, you are building a community. That is the point of twitter. Bringing together computational biologists, scientists and engineers all over the world! And whoever else.
 
Once that network exists, all kind of other tangible benefits could come out of that. Announce a DREAM challenge, you already have an audience of potential candidates. Want to talk about what the next DREAM challenge should be? You have a group of people to bounce ideas off of. Looking to hire someone? What better way to get the word out than letting a network of competent professionals know (and by extension, everyone they know). Having a funny problem with a program or workflow? Maybe someone else has had a similar problem, or even solved it. Or knows someone who has. Who knows?
 
Just like in life, it is not about you, it is about everyone else. Stop trying to project something out in the world and instead listen and try and understand what is happening with everyone else.
 
Anyway, I hope that gives some insight into this beast. I dismissed it for a long time (maybe just because saying "tweet" is so silly?) but eventually came around once I realized it is really just people, and you can treat them like friends and collaborators.
 
Also, as you might be able to see, really building a community is a lot of work. I also used to dismiss "community manager" type roles (you get paid to tweet stuff???) but it is really a lot more than just tweeting. Fostering a community is an art, and if someone is good at it it can be very valuable. I am certainly not this person, but I am happy to help and contribute if others are interested as well.
 
One question and current obstacle is: we have one account. Do we all get logins to it so we can all have conversations with people? On one hand, if we all went through a couple iterations of the above cycle we could fill out a community fairly rapidly. On the other hand, if 30 people are all accessing an account it could manifest as kind of schizophrenic to the outside world.
 
In all likelihood though a handful of people would get really into it and the rest of us would drift off in our well-established bafflement and aversion of social networks. But if we are going to really use the twitter account to its full potential, this is what we would do. I think building a community of computational biologists throughout the world would ultimately be valuable and worthwhile, but it is an investment.
 
Anyhow, there has been a lot of discussion about what to do with the twitter account lately so I thought I would share my unlikely perspective on this. Hope it is helpful.
 
Thanks!
 
- R
 